---
title: "PostgreSQL Data Types: Use and understand types effectively"
author: Saikat Das
tags:
  - postgresql
  - sql
  - datatype
  - types
icon: "database.svg"
date: "2021-01-25"
---

PostgreSQL supports a plethora of different data types. We'll cover the basic types here and provide some guidance around when to use which.

## Characters

- `text` - Use this almost always. Supports variable length string 
- `varchar(n)` - Use this to specify a maximum length. Use `text` instead as this provides no real world benefit
- `char(n)` - fixed length character column. Uses all character space by padding empty spaces. Can be used in special cases where string length known beforehand like country codes. Avoid using for superior alternatives. Mostly present for legacy reasons

## Numbers

### Integers

- `smallint` - −32,768 to +32,767
- `integer` - −2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647
- `bigint` - −9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to
+9,223,372,036,854,775,807

### Autoincrementing Integers

They are ideally used as primary keys in columns that need autogenerated unique values

- `smallserial` - 1 to 32,767
- `serial` - 1 to 2,147,483,647
- `bigserial` - 1 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807

### Floating Point Types

Decimal numbers are denoted with their `precision` and `scale` values.
- `precision` - denotes the total number of digits in the number, both on the left and right side of the decimal point
- `scale` - denotes the number of digits on the right side of the decimal point

The types are:

- `numeric(precision,scale)` or `decimal(precision,scale)`
  - they are **fixed** point numbers
  - up to 131072 digits before the decimal point
  - up to 16383 digits after the decimal point
  - omitting scale sets it to 0, i.e., an integer
  - omitting both precision and scale lets us store upto the limits mentioned above
- `real` - **floating** 6 decimal digits precision point
- `double precision` - **floating** 15 decimal digits precision point

### Monetary Type

`money`
- used to store currency values
- can store values -92,233,720,368,547,758.08 to +92,233,720,368,547,758.07
- can be cast to numeric without loss of precision. Other floating point types will lose precision

## Dates and Times

- `timestamp` - date and time. Default format is `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`
- `date` - only date. Default format is `YYYY-MM-DD`
- `time` - only time
- `interval` - length of time

## Booleans

Possible values of `true` and `false`

## Other

These are advanced types for discussion another time

- geometric types
- network address types
- Universally Unique Identifier (UUID) type
- XML type
- JSON type